# CarND-Path-Planning-Project
Self-Driving Car Engineer Nanodegree Program

### Project Reflection:
The requirements for the project are listed below.  My algorithm separated the project out into two main subsystems.  The first is called Position Logic (PL) and the other is Trajectory Planning (TP).  The purpose of the PL is to take in the sensor fusion and car data, and return the most desireable target position in Frenet coordinates.  The TP then takes the existing path, and fills in the remaining path to get to the desired s, d and velocity determined by the PL.  Each of these two subsystems has their own header and cpp file, and they are implemented as classes.  Some other refactoring I did from the original repository was to move all of the geometry functions to its own helper file.  This cleaned up the main.cpp file and made it better to add additional geometry helpers.  I added geometry helper functions to convert global XY coordinates into XY coordinates relative to the car position and angle (local).   

I first started by having the car stay in lane at a constant speed just by equally spacing s coordinates along the road.  This gave unacceptable performance for the trajectory, but it allowed me to develop the logic controlling the positioning.  With the stubbed out TP, I was able to develop the position logic, and just ignored the glitchy trajectories.  I used two design patterns that were covered in the course; a finite state machine, and cost evaluation for proposed paths.  

The algorithm to determine the best future position is based on generating a number of possible paths, then calculating the 'cost' of each destination.  I called these targets, in the code, and they are made up of Frenet S and D positions, as well as a velocity in meters per second.  I reasoned that I always need targets for the current and adjacent lanes, at the desired speed.  This covers the most desireable scenarios, where there's a lane without traffic that my car can go to.  Next, I added targets to follow each vehicle that's ahead of my car.  Lastly, to handle when the car is stopped or very slow, there's an acceleration target that is at the desired target ahead of the vehicle, but only increases speed by a small amount.  By handling the stop scenario by adding targets, I didn't have to add any special code for the initial acceleration causing too much jerk.

Once the targets are generated, each one is evaluated for cost.  The target with the lowest cost is selected for the destination.  The costs I included are speed, acceleration, collision, lane selection, and turning ratio.  You can see the weights I assigned to each in the .cpp file for PL.  Basically, if a car is the path between the current position and the destination position, it adds a very high cost to that path, making it unlikely to be selected.  The other weights for acceleration, speed and turning are adjusted to determine if the control prefers to change lanes, or slow down to follow a car.  Since slowing down to follow a car adds costs for speed and acceleration, it doesn't take much for it to exceed the cost of changing lanes, which is the desired behavior.  The lane selection weight isn't a requirement for this project, but I added the behavior so that the car would prefer the center lane, and also prefer to pass on the left as real cars do.  By adding this cost, passing on the right is the least favorable path, so it will only do it if it's going to be slowed down in both the center and passing lanes.

I used a very simple state machine for this, just to prevent it from picking new targets while it's in the middle of a lane change.  Once a new target lane was selected by the cost logic, the state machine goes into a lane change state.  While in the lane change state, it will only generate targets for the lane it's switching into.  This allows the logic to complete the lane change, and also adapt to any cars switching or slowing down in front.  Once the car has completed the lane change, it goes back to normal behavior of generating targets for other lanes and vehicle following.

With the PL logic working well, I then had to get the TP working.  I used a spline library to get smooth paths between the current end of the path, and the target destination.  First, the desired coordinates for the waypoints were gotten using Frenet values.  These points were generated by using the end of the existing path, or the current car state, if the path was empty.  To generate the spline, only a few points spaced far apart are needed.  Two points are at the start of the spline, reflecting the current end of the path, and the point prior to that.  The end points for the spline are based on the destination target.  Once these points are selected with Frenet coordinates, they are converted to global XY coordinates using the maps and geometry helpers.  Since splines need increasing values of x at each position, the global coordinates had to be rotated and shifted relative to the local car XY coordinates.  I added geometry helper functions to accomplish this.  Once the coordinates are defined as local XY values, they are given to the spline function to define a new spline.  By giving additional x values to this spline function, it returns y values that correspond to that position along the path.

One issue I encountered was that the spacing of the values along the spline determined the speed.  While this is fine for no traffic (just go 45 mph), this caused problems if my new target was following a vehicle at 35 mph.  These abrupt changes in spacing caused the car to fail the required criteria of no accelerations exceeding 10 m/s2 in magnitude.  I tried a number of ways to calculate the transitions, but ultimately I used a reference velocity that determined the increment size.  For each additional point that was added along the spline, if the reference velocity was different than the destination target velocity, it would increment or decrement it by a fixed value.  This built in an acceleration rate limiter, since the velocity wasn't allowed to change more than the increment value.  It fixed the problem and allowed the control to meet the criteria.

After each position along the spline was added, the local XY values on the spline were again rotated and shifted back to global XY coordinates that could be used by the path in the simulator.
   
### Simulator.
You can download the Term3 Simulator which contains the Path Planning Project from the [releases tab (https://github.com/udacity/self-driving-car-sim/releases).

### Goals
In this project your goal is to safely navigate around a virtual highway with other traffic that is driving +-10 MPH of the 50 MPH speed limit. You will be provided the car's localization and sensor fusion data, there is also a sparse map list of waypoints around the highway. The car should try to go as close as possible to the 50 MPH speed limit, which means passing slower traffic when possible, note that other cars will try to change lanes too. The car should avoid hitting other cars at all cost as well as driving inside of the marked road lanes at all times, unless going from one lane to another. The car should be able to make one complete loop around the 6946m highway. Since the car is trying to go 50 MPH, it should take a little over 5 minutes to complete 1 loop. Also the car should not experience total acceleration over 10 m/s^2 and jerk that is greater than 50 m/s^3.

#### The map of the highway is in data/highway_map.txt
Each waypoint in the list contains  [x,y,s,dx,dy] values. x and y are the waypoint's map coordinate position, the s value is the distance along the road to get to that waypoint in meters, the dx and dy values define the unit normal vector pointing outward of the highway loop.

The highway's waypoints loop around so the frenet s value, distance along the road, goes from 0 to 6945.554.

## Basic Build Instructions

1. Clone this repo.
2. Make a build directory: `mkdir build && cd build`
3. Compile: `cmake .. && make`
4. Run it: `./path_planning`.

Here is the data provided from the Simulator to the C++ Program

#### Main car's localization Data (No Noise)

["x"] The car's x position in map coordinates

["y"] The car's y position in map coordinates

["s"] The car's s position in frenet coordinates

["d"] The car's d position in frenet coordinates

["yaw"] The car's yaw angle in the map

["speed"] The car's speed in MPH

#### Previous path data given to the Planner

//Note: Return the previous list but with processed points removed, can be a nice tool to show how far along
the path has processed since last time. 

["previous_path_x"] The previous list of x points previously given to the simulator

["previous_path_y"] The previous list of y points previously given to the simulator

#### Previous path's end s and d values 

["end_path_s"] The previous list's last point's frenet s value

["end_path_d"] The previous list's last point's frenet d value

#### Sensor Fusion Data, a list of all other car's attributes on the same side of the road. (No Noise)

["sensor_fusion"] A 2d vector of cars and then that car's [car's unique ID, car's x position in map coordinates, car's y position in map coordinates, car's x velocity in m/s, car's y velocity in m/s, car's s position in frenet coordinates, car's d position in frenet coordinates. 

## Details

1. The car uses a perfect controller and will visit every (x,y) point it recieves in the list every .02 seconds. The units for the (x,y) points are in meters and the spacing of the points determines the speed of the car. The vector going from a point to the next point in the list dictates the angle of the car. Acceleration both in the tangential and normal directions is measured along with the jerk, the rate of change of total Acceleration. The (x,y) point paths that the planner recieves should not have a total acceleration that goes over 10 m/s^2, also the jerk should not go over 50 m/s^3. (NOTE: As this is BETA, these requirements might change. Also currently jerk is over a .02 second interval, it would probably be better to average total acceleration over 1 second and measure jerk from that.

2. There will be some latency between the simulator running and the path planner returning a path, with optimized code usually its not very long maybe just 1-3 time steps. During this delay the simulator will continue using points that it was last given, because of this its a good idea to store the last points you have used so you can have a smooth transition. previous_path_x, and previous_path_y can be helpful for this transition since they show the last points given to the simulator controller with the processed points already removed. You would either return a path that extends this previous path or make sure to create a new path that has a smooth transition with this last path.

## Tips

A really helpful resource for doing this project and creating smooth trajectories was using http://kluge.in-chemnitz.de/opensource/spline/, the spline function is in a single hearder file is really easy to use.

---

## Dependencies

* cmake >= 3.5
 * All OSes: [click here for installation instructions](https://cmake.org/install/)
* make >= 4.1
  * Linux: make is installed by default on most Linux distros
  * Mac: [install Xcode command line tools to get make](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/features/)
  * Windows: [Click here for installation instructions](http://gnuwin32.sourceforge.net/packages/make.htm)
* gcc/g++ >= 5.4
  * Linux: gcc / g++ is installed by default on most Linux distros
  * Mac: same deal as make - [install Xcode command line tools]((https://developer.apple.com/xcode/features/)
  * Windows: recommend using [MinGW](http://www.mingw.org/)
* [uWebSockets](https://github.com/uWebSockets/uWebSockets)
  * Run either `install-mac.sh` or `install-ubuntu.sh`.
  * If you install from source, checkout to commit `e94b6e1`, i.e.
    ```
    git clone https://github.com/uWebSockets/uWebSockets 
    cd uWebSockets
    git checkout e94b6e1
    ```

## Editor Settings

We've purposefully kept editor configuration files out of this repo in order to
keep it as simple and environment agnostic as possible. However, we recommend
using the following settings:

* indent using spaces
* set tab width to 2 spaces (keeps the matrices in source code aligned)

## Code Style

Please (do your best to) stick to [Google's C++ style guide](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html).

## Project Instructions and Rubric

Note: regardless of the changes you make, your project must be buildable using
cmake and make!


## Call for IDE Profiles Pull Requests

Help your fellow students!

We decided to create Makefiles with cmake to keep this project as platform
agnostic as possible. Similarly, we omitted IDE profiles in order to ensure
that students don't feel pressured to use one IDE or another.

However! I'd love to help people get up and running with their IDEs of choice.
If you've created a profile for an IDE that you think other students would
appreciate, we'd love to have you add the requisite profile files and
instructions to ide_profiles/. For example if you wanted to add a VS Code
profile, you'd add:

* /ide_profiles/vscode/.vscode
* /ide_profiles/vscode/README.md

The README should explain what the profile does, how to take advantage of it,
and how to install it.

Frankly, I've never been involved in a project with multiple IDE profiles
before. I believe the best way to handle this would be to keep them out of the
repo root to avoid clutter. My expectation is that most profiles will include
instructions to copy files to a new location to get picked up by the IDE, but
that's just a guess.

One last note here: regardless of the IDE used, every submitted project must
still be compilable with cmake and make./
